TO THE READER. 411
Author can have in the means of his progenitors ; for what can the Author
and his posterity suffer of damage by the want of his estate comparable to
the prejudice sustainable by the many readers and their succefsors through
lack of his writings ? unlefs one would think that the goods of fortune are
more highly to be prized then those of the minde ; the contrary whereof
hath been very clearly evidenced in many several pafsages of the foregoing
Tractate.
Vade Liber, totumque refer mea damna per orbem,
Hostibus affigens stigmata nigra meis ;
Contingatque mihi Siculi fortuna Poetae,
Cui fatale metrum non minus ense fuit
;
Nee posthac demptum dices mihi creditor ensem,
Si calamo pofsim te jugulare meo.

412
PROQUIRITATIONS.
Seeing the scope and chief end of this foregoing Tractate is to perswade
the State out of their wisdom to condescend to the just demands of the
Author, there can no number like that of two and thirty, which by the
Rabbies of old was ascribed to TVisdom, and by Pythagoras to Justice, be
pitched upon so apposite for comprehending and terminating the sum of
these subsequent Proquiritations, according to the tenour of this algebraical
hexastick :
Of Postulatas a sursolid, whose
Content doth twice that square of squares inclose,
Which is the double of the cube of two,
Is here display'd for th' Author's sake, to shew
How that square dealing will him best become,
Whereby he gets his own in solidum.
1. Seeing, from the creation of the world it hath pleased the Author to deduce his
extraction, without baulking since the days of Adam so much as one of his progeni-
tors on the paternal side—that the said Author may be put in a consistence of protract-
ing his posterity through as many hereditary successors in a lineal descent, according
to the contents of the preceding Tractate, is the desire of K. F.
2. Seeing the grant of what is demanded in this Treatise can no way introduce a
preparative of any dangerous consequence, as hath been evidently shewn in the above
written introduction—that it may be thought expedient, without any suspicion of
being troubled upon the like grounds by any other of this Island, to condescend to his
desires therein, is the hearty wish of P. O.

PROQUIRITATIONS. 413
3. Seeing the covenanters, who are at this time accounted the State's adversaries,
kept, some three yeers ago, a garison in the Author's house for the space of a twelve-
month ; and that, for these many yeers past, by several exactions, tolerated plunder-
ings, and other such like unmerciful dealings, without any just occasion given, his
rents have been made almost totally unserviceable—that he may now, for his greater
peace in the future, be exonered of the English garison which is in his house, and,
after its removal, have himself fully setled in his own, with all maner of ease and
tranquility, is the humble desire of N. Wa.
4. That to the overthrow of equity in the person of the Author, the rigour of a
wrested law be not permitted to become the executioner of the spleen and covetous-
ness of his implacable adversaries, is the earnest desire of B. H.
5. That the Shire of Cromartie, which ever from the beginning hath been the re-
ceptacle of the most harmless inhabitants, be not bestowed on any other then the
Author, whose predecessors, for uprightness and integrity of carriage, were not, if
equalled, inferiour to the best of any nation, is the longing desire of Yo. Bn.
6. That the Author being as a clear spark from whence gleameth the greatest part
of the pure light that is to be seen of any learned invention in that country of Scot-
land, it be not quenched and quite extinguished by the foul and black water of an
usurious puddle, drunk up there by too many of the natives almost of all sorts, is the
humble request of Bu. Ts.
7. That they who look meerly to the present time, without any regard of the
future, be not permitted to deprive him of his means, who for the good of after-ages
employs his spare hours most vertuously, is the true desire of D. J.
8. That those who, long before the distractions of Scotland, had enslaved them-
selves to the abominable vice of oppressing others, be not permitted, now that by their
means that country is brought lowe, to meddle with the estate of him who never in-
jured any, is the earnest suit of E. G.
9. Seeing he is born to the profit of few, who thinketh onely on the people of his
age ; and to that of fewer, whose thoughts exceed not the reach of his own proper
interest—that due consideration may be had of the difference betwixt the Author's
competitors of dark and narrow projects, and his own splendid and ample endeavours,
comprehensive by appearance of the whole latitude of time, is the strong desire of
X. Ya.
10. That outlandish nations, where the Author's fame dwells advantagiously with
an expansed reputation, will most highly extol the restorers ofhim to his own, for an
act of perfect and well-principled generosity, is the confident opinion of Ai. Bs.
11. Seeing there is none, considering the relations and tyes whereunto the Author
by nature and duty was bound, can with any shew of reason be accounted more blame-
less then he—that he have his sequestration taken off, his person no longer detained
as a prisoner of war, and some competent acknowledgement allowed him for the great

414 PROQUIRITATIONS.
loss he hath sustained by the rigour of the unmerciful, not to say knavish, subseques-
trator, is the real desire of V. Fs.
12. Seeing the Author's treatises are conducible to posterity, for the benefit where-
of the most splendid states and potentates do usually undergo great hazards and diffi-
culties—that out of respect to succeeding ages, and hope of their due retribution in
praises, he may be better rewarded then if he were a present time-server, without con-
sideration of the future, is the humble suit of Ei. Z.
13. That he whose good name is like to be eternized to following ages, after that
unto nature he hath paid the due which mortality will require of him, shall not in his
life-time have his just demands denied by that authority whose representators upon
equity promise to lay the foundation of an immortal fame, is the hope of A. S.
14. That the Author's family being one of the greatest antiquity in Scotland, and by
an especial providence until this time preserved from that utter subversion intended by
the iniquity of his covetous and dissembled enemies, should obtain, cceteris paribus, as
large a measure of protection as any other race in the whole Isle of Britain, and him-
self favoured with the grant of all that in his foregoing Treatise is demanded by him,
is the real wish of Gh. En.
15. Seeing the Author hath been still faithful to his trust, never culpable of parol-
breaking, but always true in every word and action—that the discretion of the present
authority will not suffer him to be exposed to the inhumane dealing of those country-
men of his who for their own ends make no bones of being guilty of greater breaches,
is the hearty wish of Wh. Y.
16. That the power now in being will not permit that to be exposed to sale which
never hitherto was made vendible in any preceding age, and that the lands and Shire
of Cromartie, which by none that ever breathed were either bought or sold, should,
by a peculiar grant paramount, be in the heritable possession of the Author, as neerest
in line and by descent to the aborigenary owner, is the earnest request of T. WL
17. The Author having been very often, with an applause hinc hide, conversant
both abroad and within the four seas, and sometimes for several months together, with-
out the variety of any other company, with many choice English gentlemen—that by
any supreme authority of that nation he should be singled out to suffer as much as the
most inveterate disaffecters, out of a national antipathy, of both their rule and country-
men, is not the expectation of Wo. Kn.
18. That the reasons deduced by the Author in the above written Treatise, why he
should not be made liable to any other debt then that of his own contracting, may be
so relished by [those] in whose power it is to make them effectual, as that thereby he
may be forthwith exonered of any other burthen, is the earnest wish of C. W.
19. Seeing the Author's unwillingness to pin his faith implicitly to the sleeve of
the ministery, or to the single backless tenets in Ecclesiasticis of any church-man
whatsoever, did exclude him from military charges in their covenanting armies ; and

PROQUIRITATIONS. 415
that therefore, having at no time been under their banner, he by all appearance should
be looked upon with the more amicable eye by those who did reduce their unlimited
power, is the humble opinion of M. Gs.
20. There being none in Scotland less covetous then he, nor more averse from the
excessive love ofmoney—that it may please those, inwhom the power of protection is,
so to protect him, as that he be not made a prey to the most avaritious men of any,
and such as respect silver and gold beyond whatever else is most precious in the world,
is the request of L. Ch.
21. That the Author's aversness from acknowledging an ecclesiastical soveraignty
above the lawful supreme authority in civilibus, be not a motive to deal more rigorous-
ly with him then with those time-servers who turn tail to every government, without
bearing affection to any, is the suit of V. Ye.
22. There being very few gentlemen in his condition, who to the press so freely
adventure their names on subjects of any elaboured strain—that the Author's thus fa-
vouring this Island with elucubrations beyond the reach of his competitors, be not met
for that his publike service with such a permissive attolerance or connivence from the
State, as might hurry upon him most grievous detriments by his own country-men in
his private fortunes, is the cordial desire of Q. O.
23. That the exemplary civility of the Author, for being apt to have influence on
the mindes of the rudest of his kindred and neighbours, even unto the remotest hills
of Scotland, may be of efficacy to perswade such amicable spirits at the helm of pub-
like affairs, as would heartily endeavour the bringing of the two nations into as strict
an union and neer conformity in laws, liberties, priviledges, customs, maners, and
language, as is possible and expedient, to settle and stablish him in the inheritance
of his predecessors, is the opinion of Du. Th.
24. That sublime, natural, and moral philosophy, mathematicks, poesie, and many
other kindes of good literature, should not be any longer supprest by the injustice of
devouring and insatiable seekers, ignorant of every thing that is not lucrative for the
bag, is the cordial request of Au. Ps.
25. Seeing many in all the corners almost of this Island live at ease, who enjoy
more of their neighbour's unlawfully-acquired goods, then formerly they had of their
own—that the Author, who never yet could, for the importunity of waspish seekers,
and terrour of a rigorous law, most often in the mouthes, or at the disposure of par-
tial men, get applied in the most fertile yeer that was, for his own use, the tenth part
of his rents, should now by a paramount magnificence, reap the fruits of his own
meanes, without the hazard of such terrible soakers, is the vehement desire of
Gu. Du.
26. Seeing the Author's designes have been for these many yeers, the same, in
matter of furthering manufactures and commerce, together with all maner of trading
and negotiation, with the most industrious of England and other nations—that the

416 PROQUIRITATIONS.
present authority will not, in favour of those that have obstructed the performance of
so worthy enterprises, denude hiin of his just inheritance, is the real hope of
Yi. Pn.
27. As the overthrow of vice should be the establishment of vertue—that the reduc-
ing of his opposers into a more narrow sphere of action then that wherein formerly
they were wont to bestir themselves, should make the Author to be reseated in the in-
heritance of his ancestors, by those who hitherto have professed the subdument of irre-
gular spirits, is the confident expectation of Tm. Ou.
28. That the vexation uncessantly for these ten yeers past, sustained by the author
from men of unsatisfiable appetites, in matter of worldly means, may not, as formerly,
to the great hinderance of divulging treatises conducible to posterity, be any longer
an impediment unto him, is the cordial wish of R. Yu.
29. As the love of goodness more then money, deserveth a larger influence of
grace—so, that the Author's affection to the equitable customs and innate civility of the
English nation, being of a more generous temper then that sullen and selfish disposi-
tion in many others, which doth no longer relish their conversation then it is found
apt to shore up the advantage of some pecuniary interest, may be regarded with an
eye of greater favour, is the hearty request of Gn. We.
30. Seeing there are many gentlemen of considerable estates, who, though actually
in charge against the English, as pretended opposers of Presbytery, did either enrich
themselves, or by their levies and quarterings in the Kirk's service, received great
profits, to the no small damage of the country, do nevertheless, and that justly too,
enjoy their means at this time, which good fortune notwithstanding in them I wish no
man to envie, with as much tranquillity as before—that the Author, who never yet
had any benefit to the prejudice of another, be placed, if not in a better, at least, ac-
cording to the rules of distributive justice, in an equal condition with any of those, is
the real expectation of Tu. J.
3 1 . That a plenary grant of the Author's demands, after the manner above specified
in this noble Tractate of his Introduction, will prove a great encouragement to good
spirits, and hinderance to none in the prosecuting of vertuous endeavours, is the sted-
fast and firm opinion of Wu. Fn.
32. That this is the unanimous desire, wish, request, suit, opinion, hope, and ex-
pectation of all the good persons of either sexe, with whom of any nation, in whatever
country, whether at home or abroad, the Author hath been formerly acquainted, is
duely testified and affirmed by Tn. Vs.

PROQUIRITATIONS. 417
THE CYPHRAL DISTICH.
5.3.27.38.32.14.21.8.66.8.70.39.5.9.12.18.2.3.56.
5.1.7.3.2.13.19.3.25.9.3.16.6.
25.15.13.6.11.20.5.1.2.12.1.20.20.49.20.20.35.33.
4.6.8.35.5.38.5.5.18.10.3.11.32.42.
Of carping Zoil and despightful Momus,
Let th' innate baseness be exiled from us,
Who worthily would hear or read this book ;
For if upon this Cyphral Distich look
An honest skilful man, he'll therein finde
His own heart's wishes, and the Author's nrinde.
Parva peto, debkns minus, et plus spondeo ; at istis
Plura dabit genio spero Camcena meo.
Englished thus
;
Little I ask, I owe less on the score,
I promise much, yet hope to perform more.
FINIS.
3G.
